docs/testing.md, before:

# Testing and Benchmarking

Runtime execution tests
-----------------------

These tests compile Metal kernels with `xcrun` and run them through the CuMetal runtime:

```bash
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_vector_add_heap_alloc --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_vector_add_cu --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_sample_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_matrix_mul --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_null_stream_sync --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_per_thread --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_async_memops --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_event --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_wait_event --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_query --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_memcpy_kind --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_symbol_memcpy --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_mem_get_info --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_host_alloc --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_host_pointer_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_flags --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_callback --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_properties --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_attribute --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_reset --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_flags --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_error_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_profiler_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_curand_uniform --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_cublas_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_matrix_mul --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_null_stream_sync --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_device_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_error_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_profiler_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_device_query --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_device_attribute --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_flags --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_per_thread --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_callback --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_context_switch --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_context_requirements --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_async_memcpy --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_memset --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_mem_get_info --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_mem_alloc_managed --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_host_alloc --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_host_pointer_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_module_load_data --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_module_load_data_ptx --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_launch_extra --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_launch_extra_scalar --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_wait_event --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_axpy_offset --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_atomic --output-on-failure
# binary-shim-only tests (`CUMETAL_ENABLE_BINARY_SHIM=ON`):
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_path --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_call_config_registration --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_fatbin_ptx --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_legacy_launch_registration --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_fatbinary2_symbols --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_var_symbol --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_allocation_table --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_module_cache --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_library_conflict --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_metallib_parser --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_ptx_parser --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_intrinsic_lower --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_printf_lower --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_addrspace_pass --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_metadata_pass --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_phase1_pipeline --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_ptx_lower_to_llvm --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_cumetal_bench_help --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_cumetal_bench_ratio_gate --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_runtime_library_aliases --output-on-failure
# binary-shim-only unit tests (`CUMETAL_ENABLE_BINARY_SHIM=ON`):
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_binary_shim_symbol_exports --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_binary_shim_library_alias --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_binary_shim_link_alias --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_library_link_aliases --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R ptx_sweep_supported_ops --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R ptx_sweep_unsupported_ops --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_install_uninstall_scripts --output-on-failure
```

Conformance suite
-----------------

Phase 4 conformance gate over functional tests:

```bash
ctest --test-dir build -R conformance_phase4_functional --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu --output-on-failure
```

Notes:
- `conformance_phase4_functional` now prints per-test progress (`[i/N]`) and applies a per-test timeout.
- Override per-test timeout with `CUMETAL_CONFORMANCE_SINGLE_TEST_TIMEOUT` (seconds, default `120`).
- `air_abi_xcode_matrix_regression` uses `CUMETAL_XCODE15_DEVELOPER_DIR`/`CUMETAL_XCODE16_DEVELOPER_DIR` when set.
  If unset, it falls back to `xcode-select -p` for both slots (single-Xcode mode).
- `conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu` is registered only when llm.c is configured (set `CUMETAL_LLMC_DIR`
  before CMake configure, or place checkout at `../llm.c` relative to this repo root).
- When registered, `conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu` auto-wires CuMetal's LLVM+fatbin shim flow:
  `scripts/build_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh` + `scripts/run_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh`.
- `conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu` now fails on any `TENSOR NOT OK` marker and requires
  `overall okay: 1` in output.

Direct invocation with custom threshold/regex:

```bash
./tests/conformance/run_conformance_suite.sh build 90 '^functional_'
```

Optional llm.c stress harness setup:

```bash
export CUMETAL_LLMC_DIR="/path/to/llm.c"
# optional overrides:
export CUMETAL_LLMC_BUILD_CMD="scripts/build_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh"
export CUMETAL_LLMC_TEST_CMD="scripts/run_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh"
# optional: gradient checker tolerance applied by build shim patching
export CUMETAL_LLMC_GRAD_TOL="1.2e-2"
```

Benchmark runner
----------------

```bash
./scripts/generate_reference_metallib.sh
./build/cumetal_bench \
  --metallib tests/air_abi/reference/reference.metallib \
  --kernel vector_add \
  --elements 262144 \
  --warmup 5 \
  --iterations 50 \
  --max-ratio 2.0
```

If `xcrun metal`/`xcrun metallib` are unavailable
--------------------------------------------------

```bash
./build/cumetal-air-emitter \
  --input tests/air_abi/reference/vector_add_air.ll \
  --output /tmp/vector_add.experimental.metallib \
  --mode experimental \
  --overwrite

./build/air_validate /tmp/vector_add.experimental.metallib \
  --require-function-list --require-metadata
```

Commit message:

ptx: add direct Metal lowering for all llm.c kernels; fix scalar arg inference
- Add compiler/ptx/src/lower_to_metal.cpp with Metal kernel implementations
  for all 17 llm.c GPT-2 training kernels (encoder, layernorm, matmul,
  permute, softmax, residual, gelu, fused_classifier, adamw, etc.)
- Wire PTX→Metal path in cumetalc and registration so known kernels bypass
  the LLVM lowering path and compile directly to Metal source
- Infer kernel arg kinds (buffer vs. scalar) from PTX .param metadata in
  registration, eliminating the 8-byte probe bug for 4-byte scalars
- Fix register-to-param tracking in parser: skip register propagation for
  ld.param instructions to prevent immediate map erasure of loaded params
- Clip PTX-inferred arg_count at null-terminator for backward compatibility
  with callers that null-terminate their args arrays
- Add CUMETAL_LLMC_EMULATION_SKIP env var for per-kernel bisect testing
- Fix gelu_forward_kernel const qualifier and fused_classifier threadgroup sync
- All 107 unit/functional tests pass; conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu passes with
  CUMETAL_LLMC_REQUIRE_NO_EMULATION=1 (no CPU emulation hits)

docs/testing.md, after:

# Testing and Benchmarking

Runtime execution tests
-----------------------

These tests compile Metal kernels with `xcrun` and run them through the CuMetal runtime:

```bash
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_vector_add_heap_alloc --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_vector_add_cu --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_sample_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_matrix_mul --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_null_stream_sync --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_per_thread --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_async_memops --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_event --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_wait_event --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_query --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_memcpy_kind --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_symbol_memcpy --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_mem_get_info --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_host_alloc --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_host_pointer_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_flags --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_stream_callback --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_properties --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_attribute --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_reset --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_device_flags --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_error_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_profiler_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_curand_uniform --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_cublas_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_vector_add --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_matrix_mul --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_null_stream_sync --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_device_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_error_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_profiler_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_device_query --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_device_attribute --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_flags --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_per_thread --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_callback --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_context_switch --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_context_requirements --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_async_memcpy --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_memset --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_mem_get_info --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_mem_alloc_managed --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_host_alloc --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_host_pointer_api --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_module_load_data --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_module_load_data_ptx --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_launch_extra --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_launch_extra_scalar --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_driver_stream_wait_event --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_axpy_offset --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_atomic --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_ptx_lowering_regression --output-on-failure
# binary-shim-only tests (`CUMETAL_ENABLE_BINARY_SHIM=ON`):
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_path --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_call_config_registration --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_fatbin_ptx --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_legacy_launch_registration --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_fatbinary2_symbols --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R functional_runtime_registration_var_symbol --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_allocation_table --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_module_cache --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_library_conflict --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_metallib_parser --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_ptx_parser --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_intrinsic_lower --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_printf_lower --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_addrspace_pass --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_metadata_pass --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_phase1_pipeline --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_ptx_lower_to_llvm --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_cumetal_bench_help --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_cumetal_bench_ratio_gate --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_runtime_library_aliases --output-on-failure
# binary-shim-only unit tests (`CUMETAL_ENABLE_BINARY_SHIM=ON`):
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_binary_shim_symbol_exports --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_binary_shim_library_alias --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_binary_shim_link_alias --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_library_link_aliases --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R ptx_sweep_supported_ops --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R ptx_sweep_unsupported_ops --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R unit_install_uninstall_scripts --output-on-failure
```

Conformance suite
-----------------

Phase 4 conformance gate over functional tests:

```bash
ctest --test-dir build -R conformance_phase4_functional --output-on-failure
ctest --test-dir build -R conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu --output-on-failure
```

Notes:
- `conformance_phase4_functional` now prints per-test progress (`[i/N]`) and applies a per-test timeout.
- Override per-test timeout with `CUMETAL_CONFORMANCE_SINGLE_TEST_TIMEOUT` (seconds, default `120`).
- `air_abi_xcode_matrix_regression` uses `CUMETAL_XCODE15_DEVELOPER_DIR`/`CUMETAL_XCODE16_DEVELOPER_DIR` when set.
  If unset, it falls back to `xcode-select -p` for both slots (single-Xcode mode).
- `conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu` is registered only when llm.c is configured (set `CUMETAL_LLMC_DIR`
  before CMake configure, or place checkout at `../llm.c` relative to this repo root).
- When registered, `conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu` auto-wires CuMetal's LLVM+fatbin shim flow:
  `scripts/build_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh` + `scripts/run_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh`.
- `conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu` fails on any `TENSOR NOT OK` marker and requires
  `overall okay: 1` in output.
- By default, the harness traces runtime fallback markers (`CUMETAL_LLMC_EMULATION`) so you can
  see when launches are still handled by the llm.c emulation path.
- To force pure PTX-lowered execution (no llm.c emulation fallback), run:

```bash
CUMETAL_LLMC_REQUIRE_NO_EMULATION=1 \
ctest --test-dir build -R conformance_llmc_gpt2fp32cu --output-on-failure
```

Direct invocation with custom threshold/regex:

```bash
./tests/conformance/run_conformance_suite.sh build 90 '^functional_'
```

Optional llm.c stress harness setup:

```bash
export CUMETAL_LLMC_DIR="/path/to/llm.c"
# optional overrides:
export CUMETAL_LLMC_BUILD_CMD="scripts/build_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh"
export CUMETAL_LLMC_TEST_CMD="scripts/run_llmc_test_gpt2fp32cu.sh"
# optional: gradient checker tolerance applied by build shim patching
export CUMETAL_LLMC_GRAD_TOL="1.2e-2"
# optional: hard-disable llm.c runtime emulation fallback
export CUMETAL_DISABLE_LLMC_EMULATION="1"
```

Kernel argument notes:
- Scalar kernel params should be passed as `CUMETAL_ARG_BYTES` (with `size_bytes`) or via a
  device buffer.
- Passing a host scalar pointer as `CUMETAL_ARG_BUFFER` is invalid and will fail launch with
  `cudaErrorInvalidDevicePointer`.

Benchmark runner
----------------

```bash
./scripts/generate_reference_metallib.sh
./build/cumetal_bench \
  --metallib tests/air_abi/reference/reference.metallib \
  --kernel vector_add \
  --elements 262144 \
  --warmup 5 \
  --iterations 50 \
  --max-ratio 2.0
```

If `xcrun metal`/`xcrun metallib` are unavailable
--------------------------------------------------

```bash
./build/cumetal-air-emitter \
  --input tests/air_abi/reference/vector_add_air.ll \
  --output /tmp/vector_add.experimental.metallib \
  --mode experimental \
  --overwrite

./build/air_validate /tmp/vector_add.experimental.metallib \
  --require-function-list --require-metadata
```
